---
layout: post
title: Staying Up to Date with Daily Status Emails
published: false
---

A couple months ago, I noticed I followed the same routine every
morning when I got to work: sit down at my desk, hook up my laptop
and open about ten different analytics dashboards. That may seem
like a lot, so here's a breakdown:

-   Google Analytics for analyzing web traffic (including page
    views, ad traffic, referrals, and load times) and app usage.
-   Our log viewer to spot errors in warnings.
-   Twitter for keeping track of followers, favorites, and retweets.
-   Our API dashboard to make sure it's performant and see if
    anything is out of the ordinary.
-   Google Play for reviews, search position, and installs.
-   Our family account dashboard for number of new families, percent
    of families retained, active users in the past month, and total
    number of accounts.
-   Facebook Insights for keeping tabs on likes and social reach.
-   Our usage dashboard to see the most popular apps launched from
    the Sandbox and aggregate usage statistics.

For the first half hour of work, I wouldn't actually do any work.
I'd just pore over analytics and flip between dashboards. Everyone
else in the office had a similar routine.

I figured we could do better. I thought about setting up a real-time
dashboard with all the pertinent information, but quickly scrapped
that as we'd probably stare at it all day. Instead of real-time, I
went the other way and decided on daily status emails -- all the
things we checked in the morning condensed into one email.

They started off simple, with just a few important numbers and links
to all the aforementioned dashboards. Over the course of a week, I
added more stuff and tweaked the format until the links weren't
necessary any more; the email provided everything we needed to know.

The boost in productivity was great. Instead of wasting half an
hour every morning, we could skim an email over breakfast. That's
not all, though. Having a log of emails made it easy to look back
and see how things are doing relative to yesterday or last week.
