---
title: Clojure's threading macros
---

I recently learned Clojure.
It was my first experience with a Lisp,
and I enjoyed it.
It felt like a mix of Ruby, which I use in my day job,
and Haskell, which I use in my side projects.

One thing in particular stood out to me: threading macros.
Some of the ones in the standard library are [`->`][], [`->>`][], and [`as->`][].
They elegantly solve writing imperative-style code in a functional language.

They stood out to me because they're like a much better version of [Flow][].
Since functions with a variable number of arguments are hard in Haskell,
Flow only works with pipelines of functions with a single argument.
Clojure's threading macros can work with any number of arguments in any position.

If you aren't familiar with them,
here is a quick overview of the threading macros.
`->` is "thread first".
It is easiest to explain with examples.

``` clj
(-> x
    f)
;; (f x)
(-> x
    f
    g)  
;; (g (f x))
(-> x
    (f y))
;; (f x y)
```

So it fills in the first argument
and carries it through all the forms.
If you want to fill in the last argument,
use `->>`, the "thread last" macro.

``` clj
(->> x
     f)
;; (f x)
(->> x
     f
     g)  
;; (g (f x))
(->> x
     (f y))
;; (f y x)
```

If you need more control than that,
you can use `as->`, the "thread as" macro.
It allows you to fill in an arbitrary argument.

``` clj
(as-> x $
      (f $))
;; (f x)
(as-> x $
      (f $)
      (g $))
;; (g (f x))
(as-> x $
      (f $ y))
;; (f x y)
(as-> x $
      (f y $))
;; (f y x)
(as -> x $
      (f $ y)
      (g z $))
;; (g z (f x y))
```

These macros are a powerful way to write expressive functional pipelines.
I was surprised to find that they were idiomatic Clojure,
considering [the backlash][] Flow got from the Haskell community.
That is one of many things that makes me think the Clojure community is more pragmatic than Haskell's.

Regardless, this is a neat feature of Clojure.
I wish Haskell had something similar.
Unfortunately I think it would require Template Haskell.
But it could be fun to write functions like this:

``` hs
$(as-> x _
       (f _ y)
       (g z _))
-- (g z (f x y))
```

[`->`]: https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/-%3E
[`->>`]: https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/-%3E%3E
[`as->`]: http://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/as-%3E
[flow]: {% post_url 2015-04-09-write-more-understandable-haskell-with-flow %}
[the backlast]: {% post_url 2015-04-16-on-the-reaction-to-flow %}
