---
title: Announcing Saturn, a Haskell library for handling `cron` schedules
---

I'm happy to announce [Saturn](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/saturn-1.0.0.2), a small Haskell library for handling POSIX `cron` schedules.
It can parse and render schedules, as well as tell you the next time that would match a schedule.
And that's about it.

## Motivation

I've been using the [`cron`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cron-0.7.0) package for a long time.
Unfortunately it seems to be unmaintained.
I've opened pull requests that have gone without any type of response for over a year.

I considered attempting to take over the `cron` package, but it supports a few features that I didn't want to support.
So instead I shrunk the API to the smallest set that would cover my use cases and pulled that into a new package.

## Limitations

Saturn only supports POSIX `cron`, which might be more limited than you'd expect.
Some notable omissions are steps, like `*/2`, and nice day or month names, like `MON` or `JAN`.

Also Saturn only supports `cron` _schedules_, not entire _expressions_ which are the lines in a `crontab` file.
For my use cases, I only need the schedule.
That's because the main loop for running tasks lives in something else, like a job queue.

## Experiments

I developed Saturn using multiple public libraries, which is a relatively new feature in Cabal.
The main library (`saturn:lib:saturn`) exposes the public API.
It's backed by another "internal" library (`saturn:lib:unstable`) that exposes all the gory details.
My intent with this was to try to make the `*.Internal` module pattern a little more explicit.
All of Saturn's internals are there for you to use, but you have to very explicitly opt into them.

And finally there's a test library (`saturn:lib:spec`).
This won't be useful for most people, but it does expose QuickCheck generators for all of Saturn's types.
So if you want to write property tests with `cron` schedules, this might be useful for you.
